Alright so let's walk through most
of the statements we made in the
previous video in code samples.
So we're gonna create a new project
which I've already done called Inheritance.
We need two classes in here, so I'm gonna
go ahead and create them and paste in the code.
com.petstore.Animal is the first one.
The second class we'll create,
AnimalVisit, also in the same package.
Alright so there's the code for that.
Alright so let's examine the animal class first.
So the animal class is the base class
and defines attributes which would apply
to any animal of type animal.
As you can see there we've got
there is attributes to find there:
name, owner, breed, type, and chip date.
Now I've included a package private enum
that you can see there with a list of animal types.
I've limited getters and setters to just one
of the private attributes for demonstration
and space purposes, and that's the ChipDate.
We've got a getter and a setter there as you can see.
Now I'm setting most of the data through a
package private constructor so you can see on screen
and also, we've got a toString() method there but also,
we've got a static examineAnimal() method as well.
So that's the animal class,
let's look at our animal visit class.
The first thing we've got a dog class
you can see defined there, and that's
declared as a sub-class of animal.
You can see that I'm adding some fields there,
in fact I'm hiding the field chipDate on the parent
as a result I've created a constructor
which in turn executes the parent's constructor.
Alright I've also created, overridden, rather,
the parent's toString method, so you can see
that I'm doing it up there on line 27.
I've also overwritten this static method examineAnimal()
on line 35.
Alright so that's the dog class, and also we've got
our AnimalVisit class there and you can see
I'm creating an instance of dog and
I'm assigning it to reference variable 'pug.'
Then I'm executing some methods there on dog
as well as animal, they're both static methods.
Alright so that's the animal visit class.
Now before we execute this let's actually debug it,
so I'm going to presume that you know how to do debugging.
What I'm going to do is set a breakpoint on line 74
we're executing the examineAnimal()
static method on our dog class.
So obviously, debugging the code should execute
up to the breakpoint, and a variables window should display,
and do this in whatever IDE you're using
if you're not using IntelliJ.
In my case I've got to debug it because I'm in IntelliJ.
And you can see the codes going to that line
and stopped at the breakpoint.
I'm going to examine the variables for pugs,
I'm going to expand that so we can see them.
So you can see from examining this now
the dog.chipDate is valid, so we've got a value there,
but scrolling down a bit Animal.chipDate
you can see that that's not.
And because we have declared a setter on the dog class
its field is set, not the parent's class.
And scrolling up, if we go back to our setter there
for chipDate on a dog class, you see the setter there
so that's the reason for that.
Now let's just execute it a bit
further now and let it get to the end.
Then we'll go to the console.
Looking at the console output now,
we can see that the toString method was called.
Ralph's dog is a pug, and of course
we did that in the overridden toString method.
We added the string, basically extended functionality
of the superclass, so we got that output.
Also notice that the method getChipDate is called
on a parent whose Chip Date's null,
we're seeing the reference there
that Chip Date is equal to null.
Notice also that the static method on animal
was executed when animal.examineAnimal was called.
And we can see that from these three lines of output there.
Came back to our animal class, and looking at our
examineAnimal() method, we can
see the three lines of output.
Then down at the bottom the static method on dog
is executed when dog.examineAnimal is called,
and we can see that examine for breathing problems
being consistent with examineAnimal()
static method for our dog class.
So there was no apparent reason to hide ChipDate
on the parent, and in fact doing so made
executing the method getChipDate() confusing
since it couldn't return the child's chipDate attribute.
If we had created getChipDate() on Dog,
we would have removed our ability
to access the parent class's chipDate attribute altogether.
So it's generally a good idea to
avoid hiding class attributes including private ones.
Alright so let's pause here for a moment
to talk about the concept of hiding.
You hide an instance variable by creating a variable
of the same name and type on the subclass.
You hide a static variable by creating a static variable
You hide a static method by creating a static method with
the same name and parameter types on the subclass.
You do not hide an instance method
from a subclass, you override it.
Now we're going to be talking at length
about overriding methods in a future video.
Hiding doesn't necessarily mean that you cannot access
the parent's declared members, it just means
that if you do not use a qualifier or casting,
the Java Virtual Machine will see only
the subclass's members and not the parent's.
In the case of instance variables,
your object will maintain placeholders
for both the parent's variables and the child's.
Alrighty so this video has covered the basics of
a concrete class extending another concrete class.
In the next video I wanna take a closer look at
static fields and what it means
for a subclass to inherit a static field.
See you in the next video.